This was a Mexican couple.
He was an oceanographer.
She was a wood technician, highly skilled in a very narrow discipline.
Anyway, they had been told about us by some previous Mexican students, and they just showed up here with a little
with a young child, a little girl, as I recall, and a suitcase.
It had just come in from Houston on the bus.
And I don't remember the particulars.
My wife would.
They stayed with us a few days, and he had to go off on one of those oceanographic cruises to the Gulf the next week.
leaving the wife and the child here, and she spoke no English.
And I had to go off on a trip to the valley or someplace for a week, and I left my wife, who spoke no Spanish, with this Mexican lady who spoke no English.
It was a delightful experience for the two women.
They got along great.
How, I do not know.
Now what was his hope when he knocked on the front door?
Well, that we would help them get taken in or tell them where to go and what to do, help them get settled, which we did, you know, get a place over in student housing and get fixed up and show them the town.
What did he end up doing?
He took PhD here.
In?
In oceanography.
Okay.
So it didn't have anything to do specifically with your?
Nothing whatsoever.
We had another couple who were Mexican, who came here and we learned of them through some neighbors.
They later became very close friends of ours.
He was not in, he was in pathology, plant pathology.
And we visited them in Mexico three or four times.
Helped them have babies here.
Took them to hospitals and nursed them through birthings of one sort or another.
We had a very good friend from South Africa who was here, worked on a PhD.
That was kind of an experience.
He was a little, he was a procrastinator.
slow, somewhat lethargic, very intelligent.
He was Dr. Richmond's student.
And when he was writing his dissertation, he'd go in with Richmond to go over.
And Richmond was a taskmaster about writing.
And he wouldn't be very patient with him.
And he used to run this fellow out of his office.
And Dion used to come into my office next door and tell me, Richmond won't talk to me anymore, just threw me out.
Help me with this for a while so I can go back to him.
Later, that man was responsible for me receiving an invitation to go to South Africa for a month, sponsored by four or five different cotton organizations.
I wound up spending six weeks over there.
Is he still down there?
He's still there.
That was in 1980.
You see, that led up to me going to South Africa professionally as a visiting professor in 1986.
We went over and I spent almost five years there.
Oh, I didn't know that.
Yeah.
I retired here in January of 1986.
I had it figured out.
They wrote me in 1984, late in 1984, invited me down for three months.
And I simply told them, I can't do that.
My responsibilities here will not allow that.
I wouldn't mind coming for a longer time if we could work something out.
And sure enough, they wanted to do that.
They came here and visited me.
And we agreed, okay.
I went through everything with the administration.
I knew what my minimum age would be, what my retirement date could be.
And I said, okay, if you'll wait 18 months, we will come over for two years.
Fine.
So on January 31st, 1986, I turned in my keys.
On February 14th, we got on the airplane and went to South Africa and spent, I was there lacking about three months of being five years.
The two-year thing kept being extended and extended.
And what were your research tasks over there?
I went over there as a visiting professor.
Oh.
Simply to, primarily, to help them serve as an advisor.
in some areas of the cotton breeding, particularly in the machine harvesting thing.
Well, the man that I went to work with, my primary co-worker there, later, we were very good friends, family-wise and otherwise, he later became very ill and died.
He became so incapacitated that I took over the program, basically.
And then after he died, they asked me to come back for another year just to make a transition and so forth.
Where was their cotton research in terms of its progress compared to?
Way behind.
They were basically 15 years behind.
That's not to say they didn't have competence.
But they didn't have the programs.
They didn't have the materials.
And cotton was not a major crop in South Africa.
Tobacco was their major crop.
To what other nation or nations did they turn for cotton know-how other than the United States?
Israel.
Israel had some good people.
In fact, I met some while I was there.
I used to come down there on visitations.
The fact that you were an American, was that a plus or a minus as you moved around South Africa?
That was a plus.
To some folks, that was kind of a risky time to be there.
I did a lot of traveling in South Africa, much of it by myself.
My wife used to travel with me part of the time.
That was something they allowed me to do and encouraged, in fact.
We never had any problem.
And this is during the, the period of change, wasn't it?
It was just prior to the time that Mandela was released from prison, yeah.
That's what I thought.
And did they have a perception, did they have a perception of Texas A&M?
and what it was?
What did they think Texas A&M was?
Well, we were great American universities.
Oh, okay.
I never sold that short.
That was a great experience and a very, very comfortable transition into retirement.
I didn't have to just cut it off and quit.
I just moved my activities elsewhere and at a lower level of activity and responsibility.
compare the students over there with the students here at the time you, in the 80s?
I would say our students probably were more sophisticated, more advanced in their disciplines.
I knew some of their students over there quite well, and they were Sharpies, but they just didn't have the
the facilities and the people.
How hard working, how diligent were they?
Not like they are here.
The way of, the lifestyle was a bit more relaxed there.
That's one thing we liked about it.
Not much push to it.
Now, when you were there, were almost all of the students white?
Well, I was not at a university.
Oh, you were not?
Oh, come on.
I was at a research station.
All right.
A research center.
The research center, right?
Yeah.
The staff there, were almost all of them white or were there?
And native South Africans?
Yes.
I can't remember any non-Africans on the staff.
And you said you had, during those five years, almost no problems?
Our nearest neighbors were in a black compound about 300 yards across the road from us.
We were at least that far removed from any other housing on the station.
And I'm not going to ask you for the dollars, but the compensation then there compared to here?
I went over there for a salary.
roughly 40% of what I was getting here.
And as far as you knew that was about what the others were getting there?
Yeah, yeah.
So that, all right, was there, did you see a talent drain out of South Africa during that period?
Were some, some of the highly capable people moving out?
Yes.
Because of.
Particularly going into your.
Because I have assumed that during the last 20 years a lot of talented South Africans have moved elsewhere.
For example, the man that was here that ended up as the, what, president or chancellor at LSU and I believe a veterinarian came to South Africa.
Can't think of his name right now.
That's right.
There was a vet here.
There was South Africa.
That's true.
And we have two or three friends here we know who are South African.
They've been here for several years now.
Right.
You were naming some graduate students that you remember proudly from your own experience here.
Describe some others that... I had one from, I had a couple from the Philippines.
A woman.
and a man, both of whom were very good students, good workers, and we developed quite a friendship other than just, you know, the student-prof relationship.
As it turns out, both of those people now are back in the States working in professional positions.
Back in the U.S.?
Yeah.
One of them is with
with a state agency in San Diego and employment.
I've forgotten the name of it.
She's doing quite well.
The boy, who was one of the sharpest ones I ever had, now is an extension plant, no, extension horticulturist with the Texas Agricultural Extension Service in El Paso.
Had those two from Mexico, had a good student from Egypt.
In those days, we had some good students come out of the Middle East, Egypt, Iran, Iraq.
Some of those were Cracker Jacks.
They had some real deficiencies in attitude, particularly in respect to the way they worked.
Describe that.
I can remember this one of them from Egypt who had a pretty responsible post in the Egyptian Ministry of Agriculture.
And he had a research project out here which involved field work in the field, making crosses and things.
And I remember him telling me one day,
how tough it was to work here and how uncomfortable he was with it because he had no one to hold an umbrella for him.
He had no boy to send for a drink of water.
He had to do it for himself, and at home he would never do things like that.
He had problems.
We had, at that time, Beasley Laboratory, which is a greenhouse facility
across from the biochemistry building, that middle one there.
And I had an officer at one time and some of the graduate students' office there.
And this, when we planted in the spring with some of the genetic material, we had to put out as transplants.
You didn't seed them because you didn't have them.
So everybody, anybody you could lay hands on had to go help
transplant.
And Sammy didn't show up.
He didn't show up the next day.
And I remember Richman told him, man, you better be here tomorrow.
He didn't show up.
Richman went down, got his books, and threw them out in the street.
He had to get his attention.
Did he show up the next day?
Oh, yeah.
And I can remember another one we had.
That boy was from
It ran, as I recall.
We were planting.
And we were rather primitive in those days.
We used a tractor to open a furrow, then we'd come along by hand and dribble the seed to him, because the seeds were scarce.
And Dr. Richmond was driving the tractor.
He loved to do that.
And we'd have people planting, you know.
And one of these boys was not paying attention, and I remember Richmond standing up
in the seat of the tractor and hollering at him, better get your ass out of the way, I'm going to run over you.
Temper's got a little short doing this, you know.
Those are some of the anecdotes which are not particularly pleasant to think about.
This other one was the time we had a crew of black women hand harvesting in those days.
This probably was in the early 60s.
And sometimes they'd get a little fractious.
And we had one who was a troublemaker.
And I had them down there working with them.
We were harvesting.
And she got to agitating and one of them wanted the crew to strike for more money.
She agitated all these old women.
Now, were these local residents?
Yeah.
These black ladies?
Yeah, out of the black.
Out of the black.
And I don't remember that woman's name.
Boy, she was stirring things up.
And Richmond came to see what was going on.
And I was working catty-cornered across the field from him.
And I told him what was happening, and this woman's stirring things up.
Richmond had, at times, his fuse was pretty short.
And he had an old black Pontiac car.
that had been assigned to him by the Texas Planting Seed Association.
That's something else.
And he got mad, and he said, get in here.
We're going to straighten this out.
And he didn't go down the turn row and up.
He went catty-cornered across that field, just like this, whoop, over the rows.
And I'm hanging on for dear life.
I didn't know whether to be amused or frightened.
That's just something that happened many years ago.
One of the most pleasant things I can recall in Haskell was when we worked with youngsters.
In those days, we did lots of hand work, and it was not unusual for us to have
20, 24 kids in the summertime for pollinating and were helping us in the field.
And we're talking about high school age?
High school age.
At that time, we could hire them at 14.
Basically, we were supposed to be 15 or 16.
And some of those kids had never hit a lick in their life.
was their first job.
And it was not, it was not easy.
Working in the sun, bent over a cotton plant like that four or five hours a day, you know.
And some of those kids have turned out to be really super people.
Doctors, administrators, tradespeople.
Where did you all find these youngsters?
Out of A&M Consolidated High School, primarily.
Did you send a letter over there or just ask for?
Just by word of mouth.
Oh, okay.
They showed up.
Okay.
Oh, that's good.
That's good.
That was great.
Now, in dealing with these young men and women, I presume on some occasions from all over the world, did you all ever see any evidences of their regional rivalries brought here?
Give us some examples.
We had a young fellow from Australia who was doing graduate work here.
That was in 1967.
We had that Egyptian here at the same time.
I believe that was the year when they had the big Israeli-Egyptian war.
And wow, this Australian was a right winger, you know, great for Brits.
And he and the Egyptian
They used to go at it verbally all the time.
As far as you are aware, did any of those international students have any problems living in College Station, College Station Bryan?
Adapting, yeah.
But, I mean, were they mistreated by local people?
To my knowledge, no.
All right, because I haven't heard of them.
I never have, never heard one complain about it.
Did you ever run into any awkwardness in terms of their religious practices and or their attitudes of what was or was not to be done?
Only in respect to
Probably the one that stands out would be their dietary.
What they could eat and couldn't eat?
Yeah.
And we used to kid them a good bit.
We used to have barbecues and we'd go with things like that.
We had to be rather careful, and most of them took it with a grain of salt, no problem at all.
We respected that.
We might kid them about it, but nothing serious ever came of that.
And almost all of them were thoroughly, thoroughly fluent in English.
Most, yes.
We had some come in here who had to go through the English Language Institute before they could be qualified.
We had a fellow come in here one time from Pakistan we had a lot of trouble with because of his English and some attitude problems.
We had another one come in here from, where was he from?
What's the country right next to Pakistan?
Bangladesh?
No.
Afghanistan?
Afghanistan.
We had a lot of trouble with him, language-wise.
He didn't last.
He just couldn't act.
We had good students come out of Southeast Asia, out of Thailand particularly, some very good ones.
They haven't mentioned anybody from Europe.
We didn't get many Europeans.
Because cotton isn't a European crop, is it?
No, no.
And that's what drew them in here, because we did have the expertise in almost any aspect of cotton production.
During your 1950, what year you're on?
53.
53 to 86?
86.
in terms of the research on cotton.
Did the importance of the cotton research remain at the same level?
Did it increase, decrease, or what in that 30 years plus?
Well, the importance, you mean in its relative importance in the experiment station program?
probably overall decreased, particularly in the later years.
Very much.
In recent years, let me put it that way.
Very much or a whole lot?
Well, the advent probably, the vibes I get when I speak with people and visit now, this whole picture of biotechnology has really
eaten into the support both financially and administratively for applied programs in agriculture.
So cotton has suffered that.
Smaller grades, almost any crop.
During those three decades plus, go back and review who the department heads from the 70s, who was in agronomy?
Well, it was Adams when I came here.
Yeah.
Johnny Rogers.
I think he succeeded Adams.
Then Morris Bloodworth, Ed Runge.
R-U-N-G-E?
R-U-N-G-E.
He retired a year and a half ago.
Oh, so, okay.
He was from University of Missouri.
And they just, just within the last month, decided on their new department head.
Now, during all those years, there sometimes were arguments at the higher administrative levels about whether the Experiment Station Extension Service ought to report to the campus or to the system.
Did those arguments affect those of you at the working level?
No.
Not me, anyway.
I was never affected.
As you look back over those 30 years, describe some special moments when you felt very proud and successful, happy.
Some discovery y'all made, some peak you reached.
You mean in my work?
Oh, goodness.
I don't know what to brag on.
Don't have much to brag on.
When something y'all were hoping to find out to Discovery to approve, when you did?
When you turned in a report to some funding source?
All right.
Probably the one thing that has had
A significant practical impact on Texas agriculture was the research that we did, and I say we, this involved Knox Walker, Luther Byrd.
We were the main, I would say, the principal leaders in the development and
elaboration of practical short-season production systems for cotton as a means of, first of all, minimizing problems with the bo weevil, secondly, the reduction of chemical pesticides, the optimum use of
of rainfall periods, optimum growing periods, harvestability, and that was translated into, I think, ultimately, into improved income on an acre basis for producers.
This was a tough nut to crack for the simple reason that
The mentality of producing big crops, high yields, used to be very important, particularly in places like the Brazos Bottom or the lower Rio Grande Valley or the Coastal Bend or the irrigated areas out west of San Antonio and so forth.
The attempt to educate people that that is not an economically feasible way of producing cotton, it took years of conditioning before people began to recognize that, hey, I can grow one of these short season types, put it in, have it set its fruit, quit setting its fruit, mature it, and I'm out of the field in 120 days instead of 180.
and make just as much money.
That probably, in an overall applied way, is perhaps the best bit of work I did in 33 years.
And the sources of information necessary to bring that about
There were cotton varieties from other parts of the world?
Mainly some of our own.
Okay.
Some from our own cotton belt, of course, because
the movement into this so-called short season idea, and that is defined differently by different people, caught hold in the commercial industry.
So they began to produce crops that are much more precocious, that didn't take six months to mature and harvest.
So we had a lot of material that we could use
The key was taking those and managing them to fit our ideal.
That's where we really scored, I think.
I can remember working in the nether regions down below Del Rio, across some of the Rio Grande River, the end of civilization.
And that's where we began to get some concrete proof
that this idea really had merit.
Probably the bigger job was educating producers that, hey, this is a viable way of producing a crop.
Why wouldn't they have bought into it without any?
Risky.
Oh.
Oh, no, I can't see.
How can you tell me I can produce a crop in 120, 130 days and make as much money
Oh, no.
Besides that, it's not good for my ego.
All right.
Now, that crop then, instead of being harvested in September and October... We'd be out in September.
They'd harvest it in July and August?
Well, let's say in the rise and the bottom.
You could plant in April.
You would be harvesting late August, early September.
Okay.
I remember back in the days when we were glad
We were pleased to be out of the field by Thanksgiving.
Yes, yes.
That's almost unheard of now.
All right, now, and as a result of that work and lots of other work that you all did, cotton geographic, the cotton growing area geographically moved west and south in Texas, do it not?
It had already done that anyway.
Oh, it already had?
Yeah.
Okay.
Since the 50s, has cotton acreage in Texas diminished, total acreage?
It does this.
It's up and down.
I would say overall, probably been a general loss in acreage.
What about in bales?
We still produce in Texas about, I'm guessing,
About 40% of the national crop.
Who, is there anybody else anywhere close?
California.
Oh.
Mississippi.
Okay.
Those would be the other major ones.
And the acreage per producer, I presume, has gone up.
Gone up.